documentation/modules/ROOT/pages/002_deploying_an_application.adoc, before:

= Deploying an Application

:!sectids:

image::002-image001.png[Example Topology Image]

== *Deploying an Application to OpenShift*

====
*What will you learn?*

This Module will introduce you to the concepts of *Applications* from the perspective of deploying them on OpenShift. 

This application already exists as a Docker Image; this Module will walk you through the steps to execute it as an Application. 

After completing the Module you will understand the concepts of an Application and how to instantiate one with OpenShift.
====

=== *Pre-Requisites*

In order to undertake the Module you need to be logged onto the OpenShift cluster and have access to a Project. If you do not have rights to create a project, ask the Cluster administrators to provide one for you.

*Ensure the two textboxes at the top of this HTML Guide to the Module contain the Cluster address and the Project you will be using.* 

[NOTE]
====
A *Project* is an OpenShift object that contains all of your Applications and other components in a compartmented way. +
As the owner/user of a Project you have 'Admin' rights to it, meaning you can create any of the OpenShift objects that you have the rights to create within it.  
====

[WARNING]
====
*Please Read* - if you are using a *shared* project you may encounter issues with naming; this is because Objects within a *Project* must be _uniquely_ named. If someone
else is doing this course in the same Project they may have created objects with the names stated. +

*If you get an error when trying to create _anything_ as part of this module, add "__(your initials)" to the end of the Name attribute for the object
you are creating*
====

=== *Creating the Application*

OpenShift provides two *viewpoints* within the User Interface. The first is *Administrator*, which gives you a drill-down overview, categorised, of the Objects and Components you have access to.

The second is the *Developer* viewpoint, which we will use extensively during this Module.

If you haven't already logged on, log on to the cluster you will be using at:

https://console-openshift-console.%CLUSTER_SUBDOMAIN%[role='params-link',window='_blank']

[TIP]
====
What we are going to do is create an Application from a pre-built image, hosted on the quay.io Registry. +
This Application provides an in-browser command line that we will use in later Modules.
====

Switch the viewpoint to Developer (Top left pulldown). 

[NOTE]
====
The Developer viewpoint is an opinionated interface for developers, containing all the components you need to develop and configure Applications
====

Select Add+

[NOTE]
====
Take a second before the next instruction to look at the options provided for adding components to your Project. These include the Developer Catalog, containing a set of deployable Services, Databases, Operator Components, Helm charts, deploying directly from Git (where OpenShift will deduce the components you need), creating a Pipeline for Automation of Components, and Samples which are fast pre-configured Applications for you to use as reference.
====

From the options provided, click on the 'Container Images' option.

You will be provided with a wizard template for creating an Application from an existing Image. In order to do this we need to have an existing prebuilt Docker image, which is available at:

[.console-input]
[source,bash]
----
quay.io/ilawson/devex4
----

Copy the contents of the field above and paste them into the text area beneath *Image name from external registry* which should be selected by default (if it is not, select this option before pasting the target image location in.

[NOTE]
====
When we complete this form the image from that repository will be used to construct the Application Container. +
You can also create Applications directly from any Image that you can see within the OpenShift integrated registry. OpenShift has its own registry internally from which all Applications are served; even
when pulling an Application from an external registry it will be pulled into the integrated Registry, making the integrated Registry a source of truth for the entire Cluster
====

Once you have entered the field contents you should get a message saying *Validated* displayed beneath the textbox; this indicates that the Image exists at the target point.

Feel free to choose a Runtime Icon for the application from the pulldown; this will be displayed on the topology when the Application is created. It defaults to an OpenShift logo.

In the *General* part of the form there are two pulldown boxes; Application and Name. This is slightly confusing at first; OpenShift has the concept, on the UI, of an Application, which is short for
Application Grouping. This is a cosmetic grouping of individual Applications, allowing you to perform high-level tasks on them. 

Select the *Create application* option of the pulldown and enter *devex-app* as the name of the new Application grouping.

The *Name* field is more important. This defines the name/label that is applied to all the Objects needed to manifest your Application. Set this to *devex*

[TIP]
====
It's actually useful that all the component objects for the Application, of different types, have the same name. +
It makes it easy to determine and interact with them.
====

In the *Resources* part of the form you are given a set of radio buttons to choose the resource type to generate. In this case it is a simple choice between a *Deployment* object or a *DeploymentConfig* object.

These components are very similar but provide slightly different functionality; a *Deployment* is a Kubernetes-native object that defines in simple terms how to deploy an application; you provide the Image from where to create the Application and the number of Replicas (all done for you automatically by OpenShift through this interface).

The *DeploymentConfig* is an OpenShift extension to the Kubernetes model and provides a lifecycle bound approach to doing a Deployment; this allows you to rollout and rollback different versions of your Deployment (whereas the Kubernetes Deployment is a single, temporally stamped version and retains no history of configuration differences).

For this example choose *DeploymentConfig*. 

In the *Advanced Options* part of the form we have the extra bits that allow you to highly configure the application. For this example we are simply going to create a *Route*. The additional advanced options include adding Environment Variables, which we will cover in the module 'Injecting Configuration into Apps', Health Checks, Scaling, Resource Limits and Labels.

[NOTE]
====
*Labels* are a very important concept within OpenShift. They provide an extensible way of adding contextual information to the Objects that make up the Application, and can be used for filtering, determining how and where the Application is deployed and a lot more.
====

For now create the first Application; click on *Create* to start the process.

The OpenShift UI will now take you to the topology to show your Application being deployed. Depending on the speed of your connection this should be reasonably fast; you will see an empty roundel containing the icon you chose (the outer ring will be white). This will change to light blue while the Container is being deployed, and then to a dark blue to indicate the Container is active and the Application has been deployed.

image::002-image002.png[Application Loading,width=300px]

You now have an Application active on OpenShift. Click on the Roundel itself and the topology page should look very similar to this:

image::002-image003.png[Topology View]

The side panel on the right gives a detailed set of information about the Application. In this case, on the *Resources* tab, it shows the component objects that make up the Application. These consist of *Pods*, *Services* and *Routes*.

=== *The Components of the Application*

The *Pods* are the physical instantiations of the running Application. A Pod is the smallest atomic component orchestrateable by OpenShift. In the majority of cases the Pod will contain a single Container, but some more complicated applications
can consist of multiple Containers being executed as the same Pod.

[NOTE]
====
Of interest to Developers is the fact that all Containers that run in the same Pod are deployed to the same physical place *and* more importantly see each other as 'localhost'; imagine running a web-app and a database in separate Containers being deployed as a Pod. This would remove the need for service discovery.
====

The *Services* are the points of ingress into the Application. Think of these as 'doorbells' on the internal Software Defined Network; we will look in depth at Networking of Applications from a Developer's perspective in the later Module, 'Understanding Application Networking'.

For now it is worth knowing that there can be a Service per port for the Application; in the case of, say, an Application that listens on two ports (for example, Apache Tomcat by default listens on 8080 for web traffic and 8088 for admin traffic) you would have two separate Services, one for each numbered port. 

The *Routes* are the external connectivity into the Service points. These are fully qualified domain names that are reachable from outside the Cluster and provide the mechanism for ingressing traffic from the outside into the Application. This will be covered in detail in the 'Understanding Application Networking' Module. 

Try clicking on the devex Service link in the right hand panel. When the Service information is displayed, change to the *YAML* tab.

All objects in OpenShift can be represented in YAML (and JSON) and can be edited from the appropriate tab. OpenShift provides a full syntax-checking editor bolted into the UI. Examine the YAML for the Service; note the ports and protocol information.

Click on *Topology* to return to the Application overview.

=== *Trying out the Application*

The Application itself is a web-based application that provides a Terminal running in a webpage that has the command line, *oc*, for interacting with OpenShift. 

To start the Application either click on the small 'Route' icon at the top right of the Roundel, or click on the Roundel itself (if the right-hand panel isn't visible) and then click the link shown in the *Resources* tab (look at the *Routes* information and click on the 'Location' link).

The Application should pop up in a new tab. In the new window type *oc help* - this should display the help commands for the oc command line.

image::002-image004.png[The Running Application]

[TIP]
====
You can interact directly with OpenShift using the 'oc' command line tool as well. The CLI can be installed by clicking on the (?) at the top of the Ux and selecting 'Command Line Tools'. +
Put simply the 'oc' command gives you create, read, update and delete access to all the Objects you own in the Projects you can access. You can do anything using 'oc' that you can do using the UI, the UI is an opinionated, easy to use wrapper around the same OpenShift RESTful calls that are done through the command line.
====

=== *Further Exercises*

These are completely optional but give you a chance to explore the concepts of the Module.

*Using 'oc' create another copy of the Application with a different name*

[TIP]
====
Use 'oc help' to work out which command. Also, use the 'Copy Login Command' from the pulldown at the top right of the UI, where your login name is displayed, to log the oc client on correctly from the Application itself.
====

=== Cleaning up

[TIP]
====
When you create Applications in OpenShift they will remain resident until you remove them
====

To finish the Module head to the *Topology page*, click on each of the *Application Groups* (i.e. (A) devex-app) and in the *Actions* menu on the righthand panel for the Application choose *Delete Application*.
The system will prompt you to enter the name of the Application Group; enter this name and press return/hit *Delete*.

[TIP]
====
Deleting the Application Group removes all of the Objects relating to the application
====

Commit message:

Added some clarification text around Application name being a textbox or a pulldown depending on project state

documentation/modules/ROOT/pages/002_deploying_an_application.adoc, after:

= Deploying an Application

:!sectids:

image::002-image001.png[Example Topology Image]

== *Deploying an Application to OpenShift*

====
*What will you learn?*

This Module will introduce you to the concepts of *Applications* from the perspective of deploying them on OpenShift. 

This application already exists as a Docker Image; this Module will walk you through the steps to execute it as an Application. 

After completing the Module you will understand the concepts of an Application and how to instantiate one with OpenShift.
====

=== *Pre-Requisites*

In order to undertake the Module you need to be logged onto the OpenShift cluster and have access to a Project. If you do not have rights to create a project, ask the Cluster administrators to provide one for you.

*Ensure the two textboxes at the top of this HTML Guide to the Module contain the Cluster address and the Project you will be using.* 

[NOTE]
====
A *Project* is an OpenShift object that contains all of your Applications and other components in a compartmented way. +
As the owner/user of a Project you have 'Admin' rights to it, meaning you can create any of the OpenShift objects that you have the rights to create within it.  
====

[WARNING]
====
*Please Read* - if you are using a *shared* project you may encounter issues with naming; this is because Objects within a *Project* must be _uniquely_ named. If someone
else is doing this course in the same Project they may have created objects with the names stated. +

*If you get an error when trying to create _anything_ as part of this module, add "__(your initials)" to the end of the Name attribute for the object
you are creating*
====

=== *Creating the Application*

OpenShift provides two *viewpoints* within the User Interface. The first is *Administrator*, which gives you a drill-down overview, categorised, of the Objects and Components you have access to.

The second is the *Developer* viewpoint, which we will use extensively during this Module.

If you haven't already logged on, log on to the cluster you will be using at:

https://console-openshift-console.%CLUSTER_SUBDOMAIN%[role='params-link',window='_blank']

[TIP]
====
What we are going to do is create an Application from a pre-built image, hosted on the quay.io Registry. +
This Application provides an in-browser command line that we will use in later Modules.
====

Switch the viewpoint to Developer (Top left pulldown). 

[NOTE]
====
The Developer viewpoint is an opinionated interface for developers, containing all the components you need to develop and configure Applications
====

Select Add+

[NOTE]
====
Take a second before the next instruction to look at the options provided for adding components to your Project. These include the Developer Catalog, containing a set of deployable Services, Databases, Operator Components, Helm charts, deploying directly from Git (where OpenShift will deduce the components you need), creating a Pipeline for Automation of Components, and Samples which are fast pre-configured Applications for you to use as reference.
====

From the options provided, click on the 'Container Images' option.

You will be provided with a wizard template for creating an Application from an existing Image. In order to do this we need to have an existing prebuilt Docker image, which is available at:

[.console-input]
[source,bash]
----
quay.io/ilawson/devex4
----

Copy the contents of the field above and paste them into the text area beneath *Image name from external registry* which should be selected by default (if it is not, select this option before pasting the target image location in.

[NOTE]
====
When we complete this form the image from that repository will be used to construct the Application Container. +
You can also create Applications directly from any Image that you can see within the OpenShift integrated registry. OpenShift has its own registry internally from which all Applications are served; even
when pulling an Application from an external registry it will be pulled into the integrated Registry, making the integrated Registry a source of truth for the entire Cluster
====

Once you have entered the field contents you should get a message saying *Validated* displayed beneath the textbox; this indicates that the Image exists at the target point.

Feel free to choose a Runtime Icon for the application from the pulldown; this will be displayed on the topology when the Application is created. It defaults to an OpenShift logo.

In the *General* part of the form there are two textboxes; Application and Name. This is slightly confusing at first; OpenShift has the concept, on the UI, of an Application, which is short for
Application Grouping. This is a cosmetic grouping of individual Applications, allowing you to perform high-level tasks on them. 

Enter *devex-app* as the name of the new Application grouping.

[CAUTION]
====
If you are using an existing Project and there are already other components in it there will be a pulldown rather than a textbox for the *Application name*. In this case
click on the pulldown and select 'Create application', and add *devex-app*
====

The *Name* field is more important. This defines the name/label that is applied to all the Objects needed to manifest your Application. Set this to *devex*

[TIP]
====
It's actually useful that all the component objects for the Application, of different types, have the same name. +
It makes it easy to determine and interact with them.
====

In the *Resources* part of the form you are given a set of radio buttons to choose the resource type to generate. In this case it is a simple choice between a *Deployment* object or a *DeploymentConfig* object.

These components are very similar but provide slightly different functionality; a *Deployment* is a Kubernetes-native object that defines in simple terms how to deploy an application; you provide the Image from where to create the Application and the number of Replicas (all done for you automatically by OpenShift through this interface).

The *DeploymentConfig* is an OpenShift extension to the Kubernetes model and provides a lifecycle bound approach to doing a Deployment; this allows you to rollout and rollback different versions of your Deployment (whereas the Kubernetes Deployment is a single, temporally stamped version and retains no history of configuration differences).

For this example choose *DeploymentConfig*. 

In the *Advanced Options* part of the form we have the extra bits that allow you to highly configure the application. For this example we are simply going to create a *Route*. The additional advanced options include adding Environment Variables, which we will cover in the module 'Injecting Configuration into Apps', Health Checks, Scaling, Resource Limits and Labels.

[NOTE]
====
*Labels* are a very important concept within OpenShift. They provide an extensible way of adding contextual information to the Objects that make up the Application, and can be used for filtering, determining how and where the Application is deployed and a lot more.
====

For now create the first Application; click on *Create* to start the process.

The OpenShift UI will now take you to the topology to show your Application being deployed. Depending on the speed of your connection this should be reasonably fast; you will see an empty roundel containing the icon you chose (the outer ring will be white). This will change to light blue while the Container is being deployed, and then to a dark blue to indicate the Container is active and the Application has been deployed.

image::002-image002.png[Application Loading,width=300px]

You now have an Application active on OpenShift. Click on the Roundel itself and the topology page should look very similar to this:

image::002-image003.png[Topology View]

The side panel on the right gives a detailed set of information about the Application. In this case, on the *Resources* tab, it shows the component objects that make up the Application. These consist of *Pods*, *Services* and *Routes*.

=== *The Components of the Application*

The *Pods* are the physical instantiations of the running Application. A Pod is the smallest atomic component orchestrateable by OpenShift. In the majority of cases the Pod will contain a single Container, but some more complicated applications
can consist of multiple Containers being executed as the same Pod.

[NOTE]
====
Of interest to Developers is the fact that all Containers that run in the same Pod are deployed to the same physical place *and* more importantly see each other as 'localhost'; imagine running a web-app and a database in separate Containers being deployed as a Pod. This would remove the need for service discovery.
====

The *Services* are the points of ingress into the Application. Think of these as 'doorbells' on the internal Software Defined Network; we will look in depth at Networking of Applications from a Developer's perspective in the later Module, 'Understanding Application Networking'.

For now it is worth knowing that there can be a Service per port for the Application; in the case of, say, an Application that listens on two ports (for example, Apache Tomcat by default listens on 8080 for web traffic and 8088 for admin traffic) you would have two separate Services, one for each numbered port. 

The *Routes* are the external connectivity into the Service points. These are fully qualified domain names that are reachable from outside the Cluster and provide the mechanism for ingressing traffic from the outside into the Application. This will be covered in detail in the 'Understanding Application Networking' Module. 

Try clicking on the devex Service link in the right hand panel. When the Service information is displayed, change to the *YAML* tab.

All objects in OpenShift can be represented in YAML (and JSON) and can be edited from the appropriate tab. OpenShift provides a full syntax-checking editor bolted into the UI. Examine the YAML for the Service; note the ports and protocol information.

Click on *Topology* to return to the Application overview.

=== *Trying out the Application*

The Application itself is a web-based application that provides a Terminal running in a webpage that has the command line, *oc*, for interacting with OpenShift. 

To start the Application either click on the small 'Route' icon at the top right of the Roundel, or click on the Roundel itself (if the right-hand panel isn't visible) and then click the link shown in the *Resources* tab (look at the *Routes* information and click on the 'Location' link).

The Application should pop up in a new tab. In the new window type *oc help* - this should display the help commands for the oc command line.

image::002-image004.png[The Running Application]

[TIP]
====
You can interact directly with OpenShift using the 'oc' command line tool as well. The CLI can be installed by clicking on the (?) at the top of the Ux and selecting 'Command Line Tools'. +
Put simply the 'oc' command gives you create, read, update and delete access to all the Objects you own in the Projects you can access. You can do anything using 'oc' that you can do using the UI, the UI is an opinionated, easy to use wrapper around the same OpenShift RESTful calls that are done through the command line.
====

=== *Further Exercises*

These are completely optional but give you a chance to explore the concepts of the Module.

*Using 'oc' create another copy of the Application with a different name*

[TIP]
====
Use 'oc help' to work out which command. Also, use the 'Copy Login Command' from the pulldown at the top right of the UI, where your login name is displayed, to log the oc client on correctly from the Application itself.
====

=== Cleaning up

[TIP]
====
When you create Applications in OpenShift they will remain resident until you remove them
====

To finish the Module head to the *Topology page*, click on each of the *Application Groups* (i.e. (A) devex-app) and in the *Actions* menu on the righthand panel for the Application choose *Delete Application*.
The system will prompt you to enter the name of the Application Group; enter this name and press return/hit *Delete*.

[TIP]
====
Deleting the Application Group removes all of the Objects relating to the application
====
